<h1>General Python</h1>

TOC

- [PEP8 - Naming conventions](#pep8---naming-conventions)
- [Everything is an Object](#everything-is-an-object)
- [Variables and Memory](#variables-and-memory)
  - [- `id` function](#--id-function)
  - [- Reference Counting](#--reference-counting)
  - [- Shared Reference](#--shared-reference)
  - [- Garbage Collection](#--garbage-collection)
  - [- Object Mutability](#--object-mutability)
  - [- Variable Equality](#--variable-equality)
- [Built-in methods](#built-in-methods)
  - [- `isinstance(object, class)`](#--isinstanceobject-class)
  - [- `issubclass(subclass, class)`](#--issubclasssubclass-class)
- [Loops](#loops)
  - [- While loop](#--while-loop)
  - [- Try statement](#--try-statement)
    - [COMMON EXCEPTION](#common-exception)
- [Strings](#strings)
  - [COMMON METHODS](#common-methods)
- [Classes](#classes)
  - [- Getters and Setters](#--getters-and-setters)
  - [- Overload methods](#--overload-methods)
    - [`str` method](#str-method)
    - [`repr` method](#repr-method)
    - [`eq` method](#eq-method)
- [Functions](#functions)
  - [Unpacking iterables](#unpacking-iterables)
  - [Unpacking with *](#unpacking-with-)
  - [Nested unpacking](#nested-unpacking)
  - [*args and **kwargs](#args-and-kwargs)
  - [Parameters default](#parameters-default)
- [Python optimizations](#python-optimizations)
  - [Interning](#interning)
  - [Peephole](#peephole)
- [Numeric Types](#numeric-types)
  - [- Integers](#--integers)
    - [Operations](#operations)
    - [Base](#base)
  - [Rational Numbers](#rational-numbers)
  - [Floats (Real Numbers)](#floats-real-numbers)
    - [equality](#equality)
  - [Booleans (PEP 285)](#booleans-pep-285)
    - [Booleans operators](#booleans-operators)
    - [Short-Circuiting](#short-circuiting)
- [Common Modules](#common-modules)
  - [string](#string)

# PEP8 - Naming conventions

- `packages`: short lowercase and without underscore es. `utilities`
- `modules`: short lowercase and with underscore es. `db_utils`
- `classes`: first letter of each word are uppercase, no spaces and no underscore es. `MyClass`
- `functions` lowercase and with underscore es. `open_account`
- `variables` lowercase and with underscore es. `account_id`
- `constants` all uppercase with underscore es `MIN_VAL`

# Everything is an Object

In python everything is an object. Functions for example, inherit from the built-in function class; the same happen for classes which inherit from class function. This implies that every objects has a memory address (yes, even function and classes). In the same way every object che by assigned to a variable, passed as argument to a function or returned by a function. We can look at the object type of any variable with the `type` built-in function.

# Variables and Memory

When a variable is created, what python is doing under the hood is to link the variable name to the memory slot (slots) which contains the element assign to the variable. Therefore the name is nothing more than a reference to the memory slot.

## - `id` function

`id`is the function that returns the memory address of a variable in base-10 ( can be converted with `hex` to see the hexadecimal representation).

## - Reference Counting

Reference counting is a process carried out by the python memory manager internally. Each time we create a new variable, we are creating a reference to a memory slot. If we create a new variable that is equal to an existing one, we are adding a reference to the same memory slot (which now has a reference count equal to two).

```py
my_var = 10 # my_var is pointing to the memory slot id(my_var)

other_var = my_var # other var is pointing to the same memory slot of my_var
# at this point, the ref count of id(my_var) is equal to 2

import sys
sys.getrefcount(my_var) 
# return the ref count of the variable + 1 far the call of sys itself

import ctypes
ctypes.c_long.from_address(id(my_var)).value 
# is a lower level way to find the ref count of a memory slot
```

## - Shared Reference

```py
a = 10
b = a
# b is not copying the content of a, it is pointing to the same memory address

a = 10
b = 10
# since the number 10 is immutable, both a and b are pointing to the same memory address

a = [1,2,3]
b = a
b.append(4)
# now both b and a are equal to [1,2,3,4] since a list is mutable object and appending an element modify only its internal state with the same memory address

a = [1,2,3]
b = [1,2,3]
# in this case python doesn't create shared references, so a and b are pointing to different objects, this to prevent that modifying b affects also a
```

N.b. There will be always a shared reference to `None` object, created automatically by python.

## - Garbage Collection

It is the way python use to avoid memory leaks such that generated by circular references (objects pointing one to the other). Garbage collection can be controlled using the `gc` method. It can be turned off (only if we are super-sure that there are not circular reference in the code, in order to improve performance). The gc runs periodically on its own but can also be called manually to program a specific cleanup of the code.

## - Object Mutability

Changing the data inside an object is called `modifying the internal state` since the memory address is not changed but only its content (es. appending an element to a list). So we can distinguish between `Mutable` and `Immutable` object depending on the possibility of changing the internal state.

`Immutable objects:`

- Numbers
- Strings
- Tuples (if contains mutable elements, es. lists, those remain mutable)
- Frozen Sets
- User_Defined Classes (if so defined)

`Mutable objects:`

- Lists
- Sets
- Dictionaries
- User_Defined Classes (if so defined)

Care must be taken when we talk about immutability of an object that is given to a function as an argument. We have to distinguish between the `module scope` and the `function scope`.
When we pass an object to a function we are in reality passing the `reference` of the object itself. So if we are passing to a function an immutable object, say a string, at the beginning both the module scope and the function scope point to the same memory reference, but as soon as the function modify the string (es. concatenating another string), then a new object with a new reference is created. If the object is mutable, say a list, and the function modify the list (es. appending an element), then python doesn't create a new object but simply modify the internal state of the existing memory reference

```py
# IMMUTABLE
def process(s):
  # s has still the same memory reference as my_string
  s = 'hello' + s
  # now s has been modified, and since it was an immutable object, a new object with a new reference is created.
  return s

my_string = 'world'
process(my_string) 

# MUTABLE
def process(lst):
  # lst has the same memory reference as my_list
  lst.append(5)
  # since lst is a mutable object, only the internal state is changed but the memory reference is still the same.

my_list = 'world'
process(my_list) 

```

## - Variable Equality

There are two ways to verify the equality of two variables in python: the `is` and the `==` operators, respectively the identity and equality operators. While the identity operator compares the memory reference of two objects, the equality operator compares their internal state (data). Their negation are `is not` and `!=`.

```py
a = 10
b = a

a is b # True since the memory address is the same (int are immutable objects)
a == b # True

a = 500
b = 500

a is b # False, preloaded integers are in the range [-5, 256] see Interning
a == b # True



a = [1,2,3]
b = [1,2,3]

a is b # False, different memory address
a == b # True


a = 'hello'
b = 'hello'

a is b # True, but not always!
a == b # True

a = 10.0
b = 10

a is b # False, float and int are different objects
a == b # True, python recognize the have the same value
```

# Built-in methods

## - `isinstance(object, class)`

Return `True` if an object is an instance of a particular class, `False` otherwise.

## - `issubclass(subclass, class)`

Return `True` if class inherits from another upper class, `False` otherwise.

# Loops

## - While loop

to generate an infinite loop:

```py
while True:
    print('Infinite Loop')
```

`else` statement is executed after a while loop only if it terminates without a `break`

`continue` is used to interrupt the execution of the current iteration are restart the loop with the next iteration. Only `finally` statement is executed after a continue statement.

## - Try statement

test a code block.

`except` is used to captures errors and handle exceptions

`finally` is a code block that is always executed, whether an exception or a break are invoked

### COMMON EXCEPTION

- ZeroDivisionError

-

# Strings

## COMMON METHODS

- isalpha() -> check if is alphanumeric
- isprintable() -> check if is printable

# Classes

`__init__` is the default method that is called after the class object is created. The first argument is always `self`, i.e. the instance of the object created calling the class object.

```py
class Rectangle:
  def __init__(self, width, height):
    self.width = width
    self.height = height

r1 = Rectangle(10,20)
# r1 is a instance of the class Rectangle, referred as `self` inside the class constructor    

```

## - Getters and Setters

Getter and setter methods are implemented to impose some dynamics in the class structure. In python there are no private attributes (even if we can specify to the reader that a variable is private beginning its name with _). Setter and getter methods impose to the user a constrain

## - Overload methods

There are some special methods that are built into the `class` constructor and are passed automatically to any instance of the class even if they are not defined explicitly. For example if we call the python method `str` on an instance of the class we will receive a standard output specifying the memory address of the instance. Unless we overwrite or `overload` this method explicitly inside the class definition.

### `str` method

```py
class Rectangle:
  def __init__(self, width, height):
    self.width = width
    self.height = height

  def __str__(self):
    return f'Rectangle: width:{self.width}, height:{self.height}'

r1 = Rectangle(10,20)

str(r1) # will print what inside the __str__ method
# if __str__ is not defined than the output will be:
# <__main__.Rectangle object at "some memory address">

```

### `repr` method

It is similar to `__str__` method but its use is more developer-oriented. The repr method should return the string representation of the class instance called

```py
class Rectangle:
  def __init__(self, width, height):
    self.width = width
    self.height = height

  def __repr__(self):
    return f'Rectangle({self.width}, height:{self.height})'

r1 = Rectangle(10,20)

repr(r1) # will print what inside the __repr__ method that is exactly Rectangle(10,20), how the object r1 has been created in the first place

```

### `eq` method

Is the method needed to compare two objects generated by the same class with the `==` operator.


# Functions

A first semantic difference in functions is the definition of `parameters` and `arguments`; the first is referred to the variables in the function definition while the second is refereed to the variables passed to the instance of the function.

```py
def my_func(a, b): # a and b are the parameters of the function
  pass

x = 10
y = 'a'
my_func(x, y) # x and y are the arguments of the function
```

To be noted that x and y are passed by `reference` to `my_func`, i.e. the memory addresses of x and y are stored into a and b.
Therefore, the `Function Scope` contains the memory addresses of the variables that are passed to the function (x and y in the example).

## Unpacking iterables

Iterables are `packed` structures that bundle values together (list, tuple, strings, set, dictionary..). As per the world meaning, `unpacking` is an operation that assigned the packed values to variables:

```py
a, b, c = [1,2,3]
a, b, c, d = 'ciao'

# N.B. we can unpack in the same way a dictionary or a set but in that case the order of assignment will be casual because these are unordered types of objects.
```

It comes handy when we want to swap values between variables:

```py
a = 10
b = 20

a, b = b, a
# this works in python because the LHS is evaluated first, where the memory address of "b" and "a" is copied in a tuple and only after assigned to the new swap) variables "a" and "b".
```

## Unpacking with *

We may want to unpack an iterable in more than one variable, and in this case it comes handy the `*` operator:

```py
l = [1,2,3,4]
# we want to unpack the first element of l and the others apart
#we could do it simply with list slicing and unpacking the
a, b = l[0], l[1:]

# or in a more elegant way with the * operator
a, *b = l # a=1, b =[2,3,4] 

a, *b, c = l # a=1, b=[2,3], c=4
a, *b, *c = l # ERROR we can unpack with only one *, otherwise python won't understand who assign to whom
```

Another advantage of the `*` operator is that can be used also with objects that don't support slicing (like sets or dictionaries, since they have no ordering). N.B. if more than one element is unpacked with *, it will always end up in a list (even if, for example, the item unpacked is a tuple).

The * operator can be used also for unpacking objects on the RHS:

```py
l1 = [1,2]
l2 = [3,4]
l = [*l1, *l2] # l=[1,2,3,4]
```

With dictionaries we have both keys and values that can be unpacked (unordered unpacking since there is no order!). With the `*` operator we unpack the keys of the dict only, while with the `**` we can unpack both keys and values (N.B. `**` can be used only on the RHS).

```py
d1 = {'a': 1, 'b': 2}
d2 = {'b': 3, 'c': 4}
d = {*d1, *d2} # d={'a','b','c'} -> n.b. b was not repeated because keys are unique in sets and dictionaries.

d = {**d1, **d2} # d={'a': 1, 'b': 3, 'c': 4} -> n.b. b has the values contained in d2 since it was unpacked for second and overwrite the keys from d1.
```

## Nested unpacking

We can unpack also nested structures, such as list of lists, with the same operators.

```py
a, b*, (c, d*) = [1, 2, 3, 'python']
# a=1, b=[2,3], c='p' d=['y','t','h','o','n']
```

## *args and **kwargs

Unpacking can be done also in functions parameters in order to specify a variable number of arguments as input:

```py
def my_func(a, b, *args): # N.B. the name 'args' is just a conventions
  pass

my_func(1,2,3,4) # a=1, b=2, c=(3,4)
# note that inside function scope, arguments are unpacked into tuples e not lists
```

The positional argument constructor `*args` has to be the last positional argument in the function since it exhaust all the non-assigned positional arguments; after that only keyword arguments are allowed and these can be unpacked with the `**kwargs` parameter. The `*` and `**` operators can be used to limit the use of positional or keyword arguments.

```py
def my_func(*, name):
  # in this way my_func doesn't allow positional arguments.
  # name is automatically a keyword argument.
  pass

def my_func(a, *, name, **):
  # in this way my_func allow only one positional argument `a` and one keyword argument `name'.
  pass

def my_func(*, **kwarg): # ERROR an explicit keyword argument is required after the `*`
def my_func(*, name, **kwarg): # OK
```

## Parameters default

Care must be taken when assigning default values to functions arguments, in particular if these are mutable objects. Wehn Python compile the script it stores in memory the function definition and any argument with default values. This means that each time that function is called, if the default parameters is left unchanged, it will use the specified values. In some case it may results in unwanted behaviors:

```py
# creating a function that store a message in a log file with the datetime
from datetime import DateTime

def log(msg, *, dt=datetime.utcnow()):
  print(f'{dt}: {msg}')

```












# Python optimizations

## Interning

Python at startup automatically pre-loads (caches) a global list of integer in the range [-5, 256], so these integers have a fixed memory reference. Since these numbers show up often, avoid to reference these each time they appear results in an optimization. A number outside this range will require a new memory reference, and that's why:

```py
a = 500
b = 500
a is b # will return False
```

The caches integers are called `Singletons`, basically classes that can be instantiated only once.

The same might happen with some strings; python can interning some string (that follow certain rules, letters and numbers concatenated with underscores) in order to speed up the equality (if a string in interned than i can use the `is` operator, otherwise i have to use the `==` character by character). We can force python to interning strings with the sys module:

```py
'''
usually is something we don't need, unless for example we are working with a large ste of string for NPL and we need to tokenize some words that are reaped often. In this case it can be a useful optimization, since if a string is interned it becomes a Singleton and can be compared with the mush faster 'is' operator.
'''
import sys

a = sys.intern('this will be interned')
```

## Peephole

Is an optimization that occur at compile time (so it is repeated each time the script is launched). For example we can have `Constant expression` like numeric calculation thata are better read as the operation rather than the results:

```py
minute_in_day = 60 * 24 # 1440
```

The expression `60 * 24` is more readable than `1440` but we may thing that, if the variable is called multiple times, we may have performance issues. This is not the case because this is a constant expression and python knows it, so the first time it encounters the variable stores its results, without having to compute it again.

The same happen for membership tests, i.e. check if an object is in a list. If we have a constant expression, python will replace the mutable object with is immutable counterpart (list-> tuples, sets -> fronzensets)

```py
for i in range(100000):
  if i in [1,2,3]:
    pass
```

The list `[1,2,3]` is converted into a tuple `(1,2,3)` so that, being immutable, it has a fixed memory address.

N.B. sets, since are similar to dictionaries (hashmaps), are much more efficient than lists for membership testing!

# Numeric Types

## - Integers

Integer are represented internally using base-2 digits (binary representation)

```
# es. binary representation of 19

 0   0   0   1   0   0   1   1 
--- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---   -> maximum number of bits = 8
2^7 2^6 2^5 2^4 2^3 2^2 2^1 2^0

1x2^4 + 0x2^3 + 0x2^2 + 1*2^1 + 1*2^0 = 16 + 2 + 1 = 19

(10011)base_2 = (19)base_10

To represent the number 19 are required 5 digits, hence 5 bits.
```

But which is the largest number we can store depending on the number of bits we want to store? It depends whether or not we care about negative values, since in order to store the sign we have to allocate one bit.
The general formula is:

```py
max_unsigned_digit = 2^n -1 # where n is the number of bits
max_signed_digits = [-2^(n-1), 2^(n-1)-1]
```

Side-Note: a 32 bit Operative system can store 2^32 unsigned integers (roughly 4Gb) and this limits also the number of memory address that can be stored at the same time. This is why having more than 4Gb of ram on a 32 bit OS is essentially useless since the machine can't store more than 4 Gb at the same time.

### Operations

How mod `//` (floor division) and div `%` (modulo) operators works in python? mod returns the floor division (rounded to the smaller integer) while div return the remainder. They have to satisfy the following equation:

```py
n = d * (n // d) + (n % d) # where n is the numerator and d is the denominator

#n.b. the `floor` of a real number `a` is the largest integer `<= a` 
floor(3.14) = 3
floor(-3.1) = 3
```

### Base

We can create an `int` object by calling the `int()` constructor; this has an optional parameter that is the base that python has to use to translate the argument (it may also be a string). The default values is base=10, since it is the way we are use to read numbers (while machines works in binary, so base=2). If the base is greater then 10 that the numbers start to be encoded with letters ( base[0, 10] = [0, 10], base[11, 27] = [A, Z])

Python has some built-in function to translate the most common base like `bin()` for binary `hex()` for hexadecimal.

```py
bin(10) = 0b1010 # the 0b is telling us that the base 2 (binary)
```

## Rational Numbers

Rational numbers are those number which are not integer and can be represented with a finite number of digits or translated into a fraction of rational numbers. The module `fraction` can be used to represent rational numbers, since the float representation can be misleading due to machine precision.

```py
from fraction import Fraction

Fraction(1,2) #(numerator, denominator)
Fraction('0.125')
Fraction(22/7)

# CAVEAT
'''
Some numbers can't have a finite representation due to machine precision. For example 0.3 it is actually an approximation. The problem is that we have to look at something like the 20th decimal position in order to realize that this is the case. If we pass this number to Fraction() we would imagine to receive 3/10 as output; instead we would get a fraction of very huge numbers that best approximate that imprecision in the machine representation of 0.3 (0.2999999999999999999998977..)
'''
```

## Floats (Real Numbers)

In CPython floats are implemented as `C double` which implements the `binary64` (IEEE 754).
Floats use a fixed size of 64 bits divide as follow:

- sign -> 1 bit
- exponent (in the range[-1022, 1023]) -> 11bit
- significant digits -> 52 bit (15-17 significant digit in base_10)

To have a precise representation of real numbers (since float may be effected by machine precision), we can use the `decimal` module.

```py
# decimal representation of a real number
123.45 = 1*10^3 + 2*10^1 + 3*10^0 + 4*10^-1 + 5*10^-2 
```

### equality

Care must be taken when looking at the equality of floats since there are some decimal numbers that cannot be represented by a finite binary representation:

```py
base_10(0.1) = base_2(0.0 0011 0011 0011 ...) 
# therefore
x = 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 # 0.300000000000000175
y = 0.3 # 0.2999999999999999999998977
x == y # -> False
```

One workaround is to set a range delta (es. a percentage of the size of the larger number involved in the equality operation) as discriminant values to determine if two numbers are equal:

```py
|a - b| < epsilon
```

The pythonic way to approach this problem is to use the module `math.isclose` with the care of specifying appropriate relative and absolute tolerance:

```py
import math

math.isclose(x, y, rel_tol, abs_tol)
```

## Booleans (PEP 285)

Booleans are a subclass of the int class (i.e. it inherits all its methods). Two constant are defined: `True` (int = 1) and `False` (int = 0). They are Singleton objects, i.e. the point to a fixed address in memory and can be compared with the identity and the equality operator aswell. N.b. even if True and False evaluates to the int 1 and 0 respectively, they don't point ot the same memory address, since they are not the same type of object:

```py
int(True) == 1 and int(False) == 0
id(True) != id(1) # True is 1 -> False ; True == 1 -> True
id(False) != id(0)
```

Objects have an associated `truth value`, meaning that they have a defined truth state. In particular, every object will evaluate to `True` by default except for:

- None
- False
- 0 (in any numeric type, float, complex ..)
- empty sequence (list, tuple string..)
- empty mapping (dictionary, sets..)
- implementing __bool__ or __len__ in a custom class

Has a matter of fact, when we call `bool()` on an object, it will look for the definition of the dunder method `__bool__`, if this is not defined, then it will look for the `__len__` method and if also this is not defined the it will evaluate to `True`.

```py
# es. __bool__ implementation for the int class
def __bool__(self):
  return self != 0
```

### Booleans operators

```py
# Truth Table
X Y  not X  X and Y  X or Y
0 0    1       0       0
0 1    1       0       1
1 0    0       0       1 
1 1    0       1       1
```

```py
# De Morgan's Theorem
not(A or B) == (not A) and (not B)
not(A and B) == (not A) or (not B)

# Operations precedence (in descending order)
< > <= >= == != in is
not
and
or
```

### Short-Circuiting

Looking at a truth table there are two case in which the program can simply is job evaluating only part of a boolean statement. Thi is called `short-circuiting`:

```py
True or Y -> True 
# with an or statement, id the first argument is True it doesn't matter whether the second argument is True or False, the operation will always evaluate to True
False and Y -> False
# with an and statement, id the first argument is False it doesn't matter whether the second argument is True or False, the operation will always evaluate to False
```

This is very useful when we have to concatenate two conditions together, one of the which may results in rising an exception (and breaking the code) if evaluated. With short-circuiting we can add a first statement that check for a particular exception that may rise with second argument.

```py
my_string = 'ciao'
if 'a' == my_string[0]:
  do_something
# we are checking if 'a' is the first letter of my_string. But what happen if my_string is empty? the code breaks. We can solve this with short-circuiting the first
if my_string and 'a' == my_string[0]:
  do_something
# Since an "and" expression will evaluate to True only if the two members are True, we can safeguard our code from breaking checking first if my_string evaluates to False (i.e. if is an empty string); if it is so, the second part of the "and" statement won't be executed thus safeguarding our code of breaking due to IndexError exception.
```

# Common Modules

## string

Module with some useful string constants and representation. 